we were kind of talking offline a little
bit we were kind of going back and forth
on what we should talk about and what
you wanted to talk about and you said
specifically we can always talk about
ketones ketones is one of my favorite
topics and I think they're mine too why
have how did you become so interested in
ketones to begin with oh man that goes
back to to tripping over the truth when
I was researching this sort of
non-standard cancer Theory you know
metabolic theory of cancer and it lead
the lwh hanging fruit of therapeutic was
obviously a switch away from glucose
metabolism to Ketone metabolism so that
was 2014 and I just started reading you
know the literature the Publications on
the ketogenic diet and there was not
nearly as much then as there is now if
you look at a Google Trend search of
ketones it just exploded around that
time so people became very interested in
it but you know it showed such
incredible therapeutic potential for
just a wide almost you know
inconceivable amount of maladies from
traumatic brain injury to Parkinson's
all neurod degeneration and obviously
cancer so it was just a dive into those
Publications and then realizing that you
know it it had this malign history of
being the sort of pathological State and
then sort of around the 70s began viewed
as this sort of elegant adaptation to
starvation and now it's you know it's
really exploded into um not only
therapies but just potentially for
optimizing health and so forth but yet
just absolutely fascinating biochemistry
the scientific story behind it's
fascinating because of the the the
characters involved in the science were
so such compelling people yeah so yeah
it's still an ongoing Fascination
there's still you know a lot of research
to be done that's amazing you are so
good in all of your books at weaving
together the science and the biology
with those stories you're like the best
history teacher that I never had like
you're really good at exploring the
context and the situations and you know
all the work of Oto warberg is amazing
but under a certain context is even more
rich and dynamic you do such a good job
telling those stories I really can
appreciate that for somebody who hears
Ketone and they think oh yeah I know
what that is um I saw a magazine cover
at the grocery store and I think I'm
supposed to eat a bunch of butter and
you know chug the butter my coffee and
maybe lots of bacon can you explain like
the difference between like what most
people may think of when they hear keto
versus what the actual molecule is how
it in the body and some of the things
that it
does yeah so so the way I think of
ketogenic diet is sort of the
nutritional maintenance of the fasting
State and and the way ketones were first
discovered is when a person just doesn't
eat for a period of time their body
really has no choice but to start
mobilizing fat and and generating
ketones as a as a source of of to
replace glucose because you you burn
through carbohydrates in about 24 36
hours and then there's there there's
none left in store so your body's faced
with this crisis and when it mobilizes
fat it begins this sort of biochemical
process of burning it called beta
oxidation to do that it Cleaves off two
carbon chunks um to acetel COA that
enters the cell and then there's a huge
spillover effect of that acetel COA and
so there's enzymes waiting to convert
that to what we call Ketone bodies in
the liver and then those are exported in
the circulation to replace glucose
especially for the brain which can burn
up to 2/3 of of ketones when you're in
this fasted state so it's really you
know it's a replacement for when you're
when you don't have food the ketogenic
diet just sort of is a hack to maintain
that fasted state so you just drop
carbohydrates down to to a very low
level and you up your fat and then you
stay in that you know kind of the fasted
State um whether that's natural you know
that you have to go back through
evolutionary history and really be able
to pin down what people ate to know if a
ketogenic diet is a natural diet that we
sort of evolved eating or not but
certainly we evolve to not eat for
periods of time you know so so all that
all that still has to be sorted out
whether maintaining a ketogenic diet for
a healthy person over a long period of
time is a good idea or should you cycle
those those sorts of questions need to
be worked out sure yeah but but the idea
that humans can go longer than a few
days without glucose it's such a foreign
concept or at least it was for a long
time um you mentioned the studies we
talked about this last time are we still
referring to some of those kill studies
where he did the 40-day fasting and
showed where the different fuel sources
were coming from and how different parts
of the body were utilizing them you know
kahill was a Pioneer he he was the one
that looked at this first through the
lens of a adaptation that was beneficial
to humans not as a pathological State
and he was when he did the math on
carbohydrate metabolism nobody could
figure out how a human could not eat for
30 days so a normal weight person can go
you know easily 30 days without eating
as long as they have water and the math
didn't work out because you burned
through blood glucose too fast at that
time it was thought that the brain could
only use glucose and so he was the first
one to prove to show that the brain
switched over to the this sort of um it
had this hybrid capacity to switch over
to Ketone bodies and that solved the
Dilemma of how can a person go so long
without eating the longest fast ever was
a guy he went I think a year and 11 days
you know he had plenty of uh fuel to
start with I think he weighed 400 pounds
when he started but he was fine you know
they gave him some electrolytes and
supplements but but he was fine for over
a year without food wow that's
incredible I can say just anecdotally I
had a client once that would do extended
fast during the week he would have his
last meal on Sunday and he literally
would just have coffee in the mornings
and wouldn't eat again until Friday and
I trained him on Tuesdays and Fridays
and he would come into the gym hungry on
Tuesday he would not be hungry on Friday
and dude I kid you not he would PE our
deadlifts on Friday he felt great you
wouldn't think that would be possible
it's incredible yeah you know it's it's
interesting my son he's a he's a Sprint
athlete you deadlift same thing so he
he's a push athlete for B the USA
bobsled team and these guys are if
you're gonna go to the far end of the
spectrum of athletes they're the
Dragsters you know they are just
designed to Sprint for 153 meters as
fast as you can carrying a load and um
you know in a fasted State there's
plenty of blood glucose there to M and
you know if you're taking creatine and
you have enough phosphate energy you can
explode like that so it's not a
detriment to I don't think it's a
detriment at all to those sort of Sprint
activities yeah that's awesome I also
know somebody in um England who just
completed some five days of cycling
where they were doing like at least 100K
every single day and they did the whole
thing facet and I know they documented a
lot of their health metrics and numbers
and just you're right like sprinting you
wouldn't even think you could be able to
do that sprinting with no you know quote
unquote fuel we I just think we so much
underappreciate what our bodies can do
with so little inputs it can just kind
of sort things out itself yeah we're
we're incredibly adaptive yeah that's
that's a good and and tweakable it's
it's always amazing to me like even
taking certain supplements or things
like that you can dramatically change
just the physiology and biochemistry
that's going on in the body and it's got
an amazing recovery capacity bounce back
from insults you know it's it's we don't
give it enough credit it's incredible
machine yeah one of the I I totally
agree one of the cool things from the
kill studies that that I you know really
didn't appreciate at first was the
gluconeogenesis that happens in the body
I think that most people would think
like okay I don't have carbohydrate fuel
so I need it from somewhere so now I'm
going to ramp up my gluconeogenesis my
body is just going to start removing
muscle tissue like Gang Busters to turn
it into sugar but the thing I didn't
appreciate was as your body is reducing
its need for sugar the need the need of
gluconeogenesis reduces so low that it
can get it from other sources besides
muscle you can absolutely maintain
muscle mass in an extended fast just
fine oh yeah yeah yeah ketones are you
know they always say muscle sparing
which I think is sort of a it's funny
thing to say because glucose is muscle
sparing right anything you can burn
Beyond protein is muscle sparing but you
the way your body patchworks together
the metabolism to rep Place blood
glucose when you don't have carbs
there's all kinds of Pathways it's not
just gluconeogenesis for example a bear
that hibernates right they don't need as
much glucose because their brains are
not as big humans are special because we
have this huge metabolic sink our brains
it cost us 20% of our basil metabolism
so it's a big problem for us when we
don't eat and but what bears can do is
just by burning the fat they've stored
when when you it comes at triglycerides
you cleave off the glycerol molecule
three car carbon they can use that
glycerol to make glucose so they never
even need to to you know use protein to
for glucon neogenesis to replace glucose
we do that we do all sorts of
alternative Pathways to replace the
blood glucose so it's not necessarily
just that you know the the glucon
neogenesis from Protein that's feeding
it such a great Point that's fascinating
we've already mentioned cancer we talked
quite a bit about cancer last time but
just to reiterate how how beneficial are
ketones in the cancer treatment world
and what have we learned even more
recently about that it's still an
ongoing thing Casey and you know what's
frustrating is the clinical trials are
so hard to do because there's no money
to be made you know you there's no drug
patentable drugs so you got to rely on
foundations or when the NIH is feeling
sort of philanthropic but um it it's
when you look at what happen so cancer
cell has
insatiable appetite for glucose we know
that that's what a pet scan is a pet
scan is radiol label glucose and you can
visualize tumors that way you inject
somebody with radiol labal glucose and
the tumor cells preferentially take it
up and trap it in the cell so the the
idea behind the ketogenic diet is you
bring down blood glucose you replace it
with with a ketone body which has to be
burned in the mitochondria and we know
that cancer cells have impaired
mitochondrial function whether it's
intentional by the cancer cell or damag
that's still an ongoing debate but we
know that they don't like to burn
ketones as much so what you get is you
get this this rarely happens in
Pharmacology this beautiful therapeutic
differential where healthy cells have
switched over to burning ketones which
causes them to go into this regenerative
reparative State they become very robust
to insult right and then the cancer
cells are struggling because they
they're not getting enough energy to
make to fuel all their growth and
especially to mop free radicals they're
always on this very precarious edge of
dying from oxidative stress and that's
what radiation and chemo is it's
oxidative stress so you set them up you
set up the cancer cells to die easier
and healthy cells to um you know go
through insul more so when you put have
somebody in that state and then you give
them chemotherapy or radiation you see a
more dramatic effect you see a more
therapeutic effect but you also see a
huge reduction in in side effects so
when someone's on you you can measure
number of times they vomit that can go
from Seven a day literally to zero when
someone's in a fasted ketogenic State
hair growth Murs all the things you can
count go down and the subjective things
like fatigue and things like that so I
think that's where it's got a real
potential is just you know I I Envision
in the future there'll be three branches
of oncology there'll be radiation um
metab or uh medical oncology which is
chemo and drugs and metabolic and so you
you'll have somebody put people in this
state before they get standard care and
it's it's moving in that direction
they're noticing all kinds of drugs work
better on the ketogenic diet you know at
Major cancer institutions we're trying
to fund a trial the ketogenic diet on
gleo blastoma alongside can standard
carot Cedar cyanide so I think within
you know if you have me on again in five
years I think it'll be a much different
landscape